+++
author = "Sandeep Reddy"
date = 2022-09-03T18:30:00Z
description = "DevOps"
image = "/images/devops.jpg"
image_webp = "/images/devops.jpg"
title = "What is DevOps?"

+++
## **What is DevOps?**

DevOps is a software development practice combining development and operations. It is built on top of Agile, lean practices focusing on incremental development and rapid software delivery. This is achieved using different tools available and automating the mundane tasks thereby enabling engineers to focus on business requirements.

## **How does DevOps help?**

* Faster feedback loop by testing code at different stages using unit and integration tests.
* Increased frequency of releases using continuous integration and continuous delivery automating the software process from code compilation, testing, spinning up infrastructure, and deploying.
* Increased code quality.
* Monitoring and logging different performance indicators of the application in real-time.
* Managing development, testing, and production environments in a repeatable and more efficient manner using Infrastructure as Code.

### **Below are general DevOps concepts:**

* **What is Continuous Integration?**

  Continuous integration is a practice where developers regularly do code commits into a central repository triggering automated builds and tests. This helps in finding and addressing bugs faster thereby improving software quality, and reducing the time taken to test and deploy new code changes.
* **What is Continuous Delivery?**

  Continuous delivery is the next stage of Continuous integration. This is a practice where code is prepared for release to production. This will help developers in having a deployment-ready build artifact always available, passing all necessary tests.
* **What is Continuous Deployment?**

  Continuous deployment goes a step further than continuous delivery. With this procedure, any code update that makes it through your production pipeline is deployed to production. There will be no human involvement, and only a failed test will stop a new change from being deployed to production.
* **What is Infrastructure as Code?**

  Infrastructure as code is a practice where infrastructure is provisioned and managed using code. This helps the team to have infrastructure version controlled, programmatically interact and configure infrastructure.
* **What is Configuration Management?**

  Developers and system administrators use code to automate the operating system and host configuration, operational tasks, and more. The use of code makes configuration changes repeatable and standardized. It frees developers and systems administrators from manually configuring operating systems, system applications, or server software.
* **What is Monitoring and Logging?**

  Organizations keep track of metrics and logs to see infrastructure and application performance, how customers use their products. Organizations can gain insights into the underlying causes of issues or unanticipated changes by capturing, classifying, and then analyzing the data and logs generated by applications and infrastructure. As services must be accessible around-the-clock and as the frequency of application and infrastructure updates rises, active monitoring becomes more and more crucial. Organizations can monitor their services more proactively by setting up alerts or doing real-time analysis of this data.

## **DevOps Tools**

There are many tools out there in the market. The tools I used as part of current and past assignments are:

* Code repository: GitHub
* Integration tool: Jenkins
* Configuration management: Ansible
* Containerization tools: Docker
* Container registry: Docker hub
* Infrastructure as Code: Terraform
* Container orchestration: Kubernetes
* Monitoring and logging: Grafana

I'll post an intro to each of these DevOps tools and then on integrating them to create CICD pipelines.